---
title: 'Rclean: A Tool for Writing Cleaner, More Transparent Code'
tags:
  - R
  - reproducibility
  - transparency
  - code cleaning
  - data provenance
authors:
  - name: Matthew K. Lau
    orcid: 0000-0003-3758-2406
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Thomas F. J.-M. Pasquier
    orcid: 0000-0001-6876-1306
    affiliation: "2, 3" 
  - name: Elizabeth Fong
    orcid: 0000-0002-7851-4912
    affiliation: "4"
  - name: Margo Seltzer
    orcid: 0000-0002-2165-4658
    affiliation: "5"

affiliations:
 - name: Harvard Forest, Harvard University 
   index: 1
 - name: Department of Computer Science, University of Bristol 
   index: 2
 - name: School of Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard University
   index: 3
 - name: Department of Computer Sciences, Mount Holyoke College
   index: 4
 - name: Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
   index: 5
date: 2 February 2019
bibliography: rclean.bib
---


# Summary

The growth of open-source statistical software programming has been
explosive in the last decade. In particular, the statistical
programming language ``R`` has grown exponentially to become one of
the top ten programming languages in use today. Recently, concerns
have arisen over the reproducibility of scientific research
[@Peng2011 @Baker2016 @Stodden2018] and the potential issues stemming
from the complexity and fragility of analytical software
[@Pasquier2017 @Chen2018]. There is now a recognition that simply
making the code open is not enough, and that there is a need for
improvements to documentation and transparency [@Chen2018]. From this
perspective, tools that can lower the time and energy required to
re-factor and streamline analytical scripts could have a significant
impact on scientific reproducibility across all disciplines
[@Visser2015]. Supporting this objective, we have created ``Rclean``
which automatically reduces a script to the parts that are
specifically relevant to a research product, such as a blog, academic
talk or research article.

The ``Rclean`` package provides a simple, easy to use tool for
scientists conducting analyses in the R programming language. Using
graph analytic algorithms, ``Rclean`` isolates the code necessary to
produce a specified result (e.g., an object stored in memory or a
table or figure written to disk). This process relies on the
generation of data provenance [@Carata2014], which is a formal
representation of the execution of a computational process
(https://www.w3.org/TR/prov-dm/), to rigorously determine the the
unique computational pathway from inputs to results. However, as the
intended user is a researcher conducting analyses, the process is
abstracted and only the minimum information is required and presented
to the user to streamline the process of creating "cleaner" code. The
output generated by ``RClean`` is the minimum and sufficient code
needed to generate the chosen result.

As statistical programming becomes more common across the sciences,
tools that make the production of accessible code will be an important
aid for improving scientific reproducibility. ``Rclean`` has been
designed to take advantage of recent advances in data provenance
capture techniques to create a minimalistic tool for this purpose. New
users can easily install the package from the Comprehensive R Archive
Network (CRAN) [@Lau2018]. The package is open-source and welcomes
contributions. For example, the existing framework could be extended
to support new provenance capture methods, and there is tremendous
potential for the use of code cleaning in the creation of more robust
capsules [@Pasquier2018]. Interested contributors can connect to the
project at https://github.com/provtools/Rclean. The project is also
tagged and curated at Zenodo (DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.1208640).


# Citations


# Acknowledgments

This work was improved by discussions with ecologists at Harvard
Forest. Much of the work was funded by US National Science Foundation
grant SSI-1450277 for applications of End-to-End Data Provenance.

# References

